Add documentation for loopback certificates in kube-apiserver (#49518)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/setup/best-practices/certificates.md

  for each kubelet (every {{< glossary_tooltip text="node" term_id="node" >}} runs a kubelet)
* Optional server certificate for the [front-proxy](/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/configure-aggregation-layer/)

> #### Loopback Certificate in kube-apiserver

Reviewer: (nit - fixing case and setting an explicit fragment identifier)
```suggestion
#### Loopback certificate within kube-apiserver {#kube-apiserver-loopback-certificate)
```

> The loopback certificate is used by the kube-apiserver to establish privileged loopback connections. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kube-apiserver issues a special, internal-use certificate that it uses to establish privileged _loopback_connections.
```

> This certificate is stored in memory and has a validity period of one year. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This certificate and its private key are stored in memory; the certificate has a validity period of one year. 
```

However, it does not renew automatically. If the certificate expires, the kube-apiserver will cease to function.

> The kube-apiserver is supported by the Kubernetes community for a [standard period](/releases/patch-releases/#support-period) of 12 months, 

Reviewer 2: q: what about the additional 2 months of "maintenance support"?

Author: The current code sets the validity period of the loopback certificate to 1 year. If we add documentation explaining support for an additional two months, it would create inconsistencies in the documentation. Alternatively, if/when we eventually set the certificate validity period to 14 months in the future, we could then add documentation for the extra two months at that time.

Reviewer 2: TBH, if we are quoting a [paragraph](https://kubernetes.io/releases/patch-releases/#support-period) that in the first sentence  has

> the Kubernetes Community will support active patch release series for a period of roughly fourteen (14) months. 

And using it as a justification for having a certificate expiring after 12m, this is already confusing.
Might be let's drop this justification until the two periods do not align

(BTW it would be great aligning the certificate duration to 14th)

Author: > (BTW it would be great aligning the certificate duration to 14th)

I will try to open a PR to fix it, but I suspect that **sig api-machinery** may not accept this fix."

Author: PR opened, ref: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/130047

> which aligns with the validity duration of its loopback certificate. 

Reviewer 3: I get the point that this sort of explains why this usually shouldn't happen. But honestly, I think kube-apiserver not working anymore should not be the way we enforce our support policy. If people want to keep it running for 2 years or longer. It should just work.

Everything else will lead to needless production outages

Author: The issues you mentioned have already been discussed in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/86552. As of now, we have no plans to extend the validity period of the loopback certificate or enable automatic rotation of the certificate.

/cc @liggitt

Reviewer: If we _don't_ automate reissue, I think we should instead formally recommend a restart every 6 months (six, not twelve).

> To maintain compatibility with community support timelines, it's recommended to ensure your kube-apiserver is upgraded within this support window. 

Reviewer: How about we say this?
```suggestion
To maintain compatibility with community support timelines, the Kubernetes project recommends that you:
- upgrade to the most recent patch releases whereever feasible
- perform a rolling restart of API servers within your production cluster at least once every 6 months
- upgrade your cluster to a newer Kubernetes release before its standard support period elapses

```
Can I get a tech review from SIG Cluster Lifecycle on whether we do / don't want to add the rolling restart that I'm personally advocating for here? I think it's a good idea but it's not for SIG Docs to call.

The advice about patch releases isn't new; I'm just reinforcing it here.

You might feel that recommending a rolling restart allows people to find a way not to upgrade. That's true, in a way, but I think it's not much mental effort to figure that out anyway. An LLM could do it. So, we may as well just tell them.

Reviewer 4: > Can I get a tech review from SIG Cluster Lifecycle on whether we do / don't want to add the rolling restart that I'm personally advocating for here? I think it's a good idea but it's not for SIG Docs to call.

personally, i have not heard of such a recommendation before. cc @justinsb 
sig api machnery should have the final say as apiserver component owners.

Reviewer 4: ideally, the apiserver should rotate any memory certificates instead of requiring restarts by the user.
@HirazawaUi do you have links to the k/k source code?

Author: In the code path where [GenerateSelfSignedCertKey](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9a03243789677637762eb0f907e1b4e45a0136c1/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/util/cert/cert.go#L108-L222) creates a self-signed certificate for the loopback client (with a validity period of one year), the generated loopbackClientConfig is applied to the kube-apiserver through the [ApplyTo](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9a03243789677637762eb0f907e1b4e45a0136c1/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/options/serving_with_loopback.go#L39-L81) function. This process only executes once during startup, so we currently do not rotate this certificate.

Reviewer 4: the code you linked existed for 7 years and likely a lot of users don't upgrade once a year.
so, if apiserver is managed as a static pod or by systemd, those would supposedly just restart it once it errors, so maybe nobody noticed until now.

in any case, sounds like a bug / missing feature. you should log a k/k ticket and assign `/sig api-machinery`, and/or even PR k/k with a fix if you'd like. client-go did have a cert manager of sorts that supports rotation.

given this has existed for so long, might still be suitable to be added to the best-practices/certificates page, but better to be in the troubleshooting docs, imo.

Author: > so, if apiserver is managed as a static pod or by systemd, those would supposedly just restart it once it errors, so maybe nobody noticed until now.

If an issue occurs, the apiserver will stop working but will not restart. Previously, users have reported this issue in the k/k repo, but we think the current behavior is expected, so we have not fixed it. Ref: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/86552

Reviewer: Does the API server pass a readiness check after that expiry? If it does, we could consider that a bug.

Reviewer 4: > > so, if apiserver is managed as a static pod or by systemd, those would supposedly just restart it once it errors, so maybe nobody noticed until now.
> 
> If an issue occurs, the apiserver will stop working but will not restart. Previously, users have reported this issue in the k/k repo, but we think the current behavior is expected, so we have not fixed it. Ref: [kubernetes/kubernetes#86552](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/86552)

that's more of a bug, than a missing feature in that case.

etcd also implements mutual TLS to authenticate clients and peers.

### Loopback Certificate in kube-apiserver

The loopback certificate is used by the kube-apiserver to establish privileged loopback connections. 
This certificate is stored in memory and has a validity period of one year. 
However, it does not renew automatically. If the certificate expires, the kube-apiserver will cease to function.

The kube-apiserver is supported by the Kubernetes community for one year, 
aligning with the validity of the loopback certificate. This means that to maintain community support, 
you should upgrade the kube-apiserver within one year. The loopback certificate is automatically renewed during the kube-apiserver upgrade process.

{{< note >}}
Restarting the kube-apiserver is another way to renew the loopback certificate.

> {{< /note >}}

Reviewer: I think this is the wrong place to describe this certificate; please move it within the **Server certificates** section earlier in the page.

> to maintain community support, you should upgrade the kube-apiserver within one year

This is not factually correct; we sometimes provide slightly more than 1 year of formal support.

Recommending an API server restart at least once a year makes sense.

Author: Thank you for your feedback! While I understand the perspective of grouping certificates together, I believe the loopback certificate warrants a dedicated section for these reasons:

  * Unlike traditional server certificates used for external communication, the loopback certificate specifically enables internal privileged connections within the control plane. This distinction is critical for administrators to understand its special role.

  * The certificate's in-memory storage, non-renewing nature, and explicit ties to kube-apiserver upgrades/restarts differ significantly from other certificates. These operational characteristics merit focused documentation.

Reviewer: Noted; however, I'm going to stand by my advice @HirazawaUi.

You are welcome to make the distinctions you mentioned; for example, you can use a _subheading_ within the section headed **Server certificates**.

Author: I've updated the documentation placement and the support cycle description. Could you please review the changes again?

Regarding the loopback certificate's one-year validity period, I believe explicitly linking it to the Kubernetes community's standard support window provides critical operational context for cluster administrators, that explains the technical rationale behind the certificate expiration timeframe
